# Tomato_DGEs

Tomato is one of the widely grown agricultural products worldwide. Tomato production constitutes an essential part of the vegetable production volume in Türkiye. The stress caused by root-knot nematodes in tomato plants causes a decrease in crop productivity and losses. In this context, due to the inadequacy of existing control methods, the necessity of developing biotechnological solutions gains even more importance. These solutions, whose purpose is to improve the stress response of the tomato plant against root-knot nematodes, will help to increase the productivity in tomato production.

The CRISPR/Cas genome editing tool is an innovative technology that can be applied to increase crop productivity and improve stress response. However, there are not enough studies on its use in the fight against root-knot nematode. However, the use of CRISPR/Cas technology in miRNA editing is a new and promising method. The aim of the proposed project is to understand and improve the response to root-knot nematode infection in tomato plants by CRISPR/Cas-directed miRNA editing. The project is the first comprehensive study to be carried out using this method. One of the main reasons for creating a strategy based on miRNA analysis in the determination of gene targets in the project is the necessity of identifying new target genes and molecular strategies due to situations such as Mi genes, which are currently known to be resistance genes and play a role in providing natural resistance, lose their effectiveness at temperatures of 28°C and above.

The project duration is 36 months and is planned to consist of two main stages. Each stage will last for 18 months. In total, the project will cover six work packages. In the project's first stage, the sequence of miRNAs that are increased in response to total infection in tomato plants infected with the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita will be determined using next-generation sequencing. The target genes of these miRNAs will be detected in silico by bioinformatics tools and classified according to their functions. Stress response-related genes that are important for plant growth and productivity will be identified. The expression levels of these genes and miRNA levels will be verified using real-time polymerase chain reaction.

The project's second stage includes making specific edits to miRNA matching regions of target genes using CRISPR/Cas9 technology and increasing the expression of these genes by suppressing the function of this miRNA. After this intervention, the growth and productivity of the plants will be calculated through morphological and physiological analyses against M. incognita infection. In CRISPR-treated plants, real-time polymerase chain reaction will verify the expression levels of relevant genes. Ex vivo culture will be initiated to obtain seeds from highly resistant plant samples regularly, and seeds will be stored for future studies.

The miRNA sequence information obtained upon completing the project's first stage will be made available in a sharable format in international bioinformatics databases through a genome-wide association study. The second stage includes the generation of root-knot nematode stress-resistant lines using the CRISPR/Cas9 miRNA editing tool, confirming the role of miRNAs that may be associated with the stress response in the tomato plant revealed as a result of the first stage. Each stage has the potential to produce scientific publications that will contribute to the relevant literature and scientific studies. A doctorate, a master's, and an undergraduate scholarship holder will participate in the project with the coordinator and the researcher. A faculty advisor on plant nematode interactions is also present. Student members of the project team will be trained as qualified scientists in the relevant field at the academy.
